Document the k6/experimental/tracing module (#1020)
grafana/k6-docs: src/data/markdown/docs/02 javascript api/07 k6-experimental/04 tracing/01 instrumentHTTP.md

---
title: 'instrumentHTTP'
excerpt: 'instrumentHTTP instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities.'
---

> The `instrumentHTTP` function instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities. It will transparently replace each of the k6 http module [del](/javascript-api/k6-http/del), [get](/javascript-api/k6-http/get), [head](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), [options](/javascript-api/k6-http/options), [patch](/javascript-api/k6-http/patch), [post](/javascript-api/k6-http/post), [put](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), and [request](/javascript-api/k6-http/request) functions with versions that will automatically attach a trace context to every request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `instrumentHTTP` function instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities. It transparently replaces each of the k6 http module functions with versions that automatically attach a trace context to every request. Functions that you can instrument include [del](/javascript-api/k6-http/del), [get](/javascript-api/k6-http/get), [head](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), [options](/javascript-api/k6-http/options), [patch](/javascript-api/k6-http/patch), [post](/javascript-api/k6-http/post), [put](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), and [request](/javascript-api/k6-http/request).
```

Reviewer: > transparently

I'd recommend taking this out, since it seems like a subjective term. If it's important to explain what transparent means, I'd add an explanatory sentence in the middle:

> The `instrumentHTTP` function instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities.
> It replaces each of the k6 http module functions with versions that automatically attach a trace context to every request.
> **The process is transparent because <explanation>....**
> Functions that you can instrument include [

This seems unnecessary, but I don't know what information "transparently" suggests here. Your call.

Author: I think you're current suggestion is correct. I wouldn't want to explain transparent here as it doesn't have any specific technical meaning: it stand for "without further interactions from the user" 👍🏻

> From a user perspective, the `instrumentHTTP` allows automatically adding tracing information to HTTP requests without having to rewrite any existing code. Calling it once in the init context will ensure that all requests made by the HTTP module from that point forward will have a trace context header added to them and will add the used `trace_id` as part of the produced data points output metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `instrumentHTTP` automatically adds tracing information to HTTP requests.
This means that, to instrument the HTTP requests, you don't need to rewrite any  code.
Instead, call it once in the init context.
From that point forward, all requests made by the HTTP module from that point forward will have a trace context header added to them, and the produced data points will have the used `trace_id` as part of the output metadata.
```

Reviewer: Side note: seems like the API has very nice UX :+1:

Author: Thanks a lot, we put a lot of effort, as a group, in designing it, so it feels good to hear 🎵 🙇🏻

> From a user perspective, the `instrumentHTTP` allows automatically adding tracing information to HTTP requests without having to rewrite any existing code. Calling it once in the init context will ensure that all requests made by the HTTP module from that point forward will have a [trace context header](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) added to them and will add the used `trace_id` as part of the produced data points output metadata.

Reviewer 2: > Calling it once in the init context will ensure that all requests made by the HTTP module from that point forward will have a **trace context header**...

I don't think this is true. Jaeger defaults to its own [specification](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.21/client-libraries/#propagation-format).

Author: You're right 🤦🏻 I linked to the W3C specification automatically, but in this case it doesn't work, gonna change it indeed 🙇🏻

The `instrumentHTTP` function takes a single configuration object argument that can be used to configure the tracer. The argument should be an instance of the [`Options`](/javascript-api/k6-experimental/tracing/options) object.

## Example

> This example demonstrates how calling the `instrumentHTTP` function in the init context of a script once will ensure that all requests made by the HTTP module from that point forward will have a trace context header attached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates how calling the `instrumentHTTP` function in the init context of a script once ensures that all requests made by the HTTP module from that point forward will have a trace context header attached.
```

Reviewer: I don't exactly understand what the `propagator: "w3c"` argument does here.  Can you explain?

Reviewer: I see it says configure the tracer, but I'm not sure what it does. Maybe the intro could provide one sentence of context.

I'm guessing the trace-context header is `"X-Example-Header": "instrumented/get"`, is that correct?

Reviewer: And one more thing, I don't see where the aforementioned trace-id is .

Author: That's a really good question. I guess this requires some context that we need to clarify indeed ✋🏻
Tracing in k6 consists of generating a trace-id (an alphanumeric sequence that's somewhat random), and attaching it to each HTTP request as a "trace-context header". There are different specifications for what that header should look like (the key it uses and its value). Attaching a trace id to a request is called "propagating" it (because it is passed from service to service).

As a result, the propagator is the "propagation format", meaning the name of the propagation (trace context format) specification used when generating and attaching a trace id to each request.

Please don't hesitate to let me know if that makes no sense or if you need further clarification. I realize now that I could make this lower context and not assume that all users will be super comfortable with tracing.

I'll give a shot at expanding a bit on this 👍🏻 🙇🏻

Author: I will add:
- [ ] A description of what a "propagator" is
- [ ] A description of what a "trace id" is
- [ ] Document what headers are to be expected according to the selected propagator

Author: I've attempted to address it in https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/1020/commits/ec13abe71ae78b068baaac7cefb4deead8b39445 @MattDodsonEnglish. Let me know what you think, and once we've reached a state we're happy with, I'll add it to the client documentation too 👍🏻

---
title: 'instrumentHTTP'
excerpt: 'instrumentHTTP instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities.'
---

> The `instrumentHTTP` function instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities. It transparently replaces each of the k6 http module functions with versions that automatically attach a trace context to every request. Functions that you can instrument include [del](/javascript-api/k6-http/del), [get](/javascript-api/k6-http/get), [head](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), [options](/javascript-api/k6-http/options), [patch](/javascript-api/k6-http/patch), [post](/javascript-api/k6-http/post), [put](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), and [request](/javascript-api/k6-http/request).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `instrumentHTTP` function instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities. It transparently replaces each of the k6 http module functions with versions that automatically attach a trace context to every request. Instrumented functions include [del](/javascript-api/k6-http/del), [get](/javascript-api/k6-http/get), [head](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), [options](/javascript-api/k6-http/options), [patch](/javascript-api/k6-http/patch), [post](/javascript-api/k6-http/post), [put](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), and [request](/javascript-api/k6-http/request).
```

They are *always* instrumented all or none, so "can" here make it sound to me like you can choose which ones ... which is not true

> The `instrumentHTTP` automatically adds tracing information to HTTP requests.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should word this that it automatically adds teh information to ones done by `k6/http` as `client` from this does the same. 
Also "HTTP requests" might not be true in the future when we add other ways to make http requests and they might have separate ways to do this.

This means that, to instrument the HTTP requests, you don't need to rewrite any code.
Instead, call it once in the init context.
From that point forward, all requests made by the HTTP module from that point forward will have a trace context header added to them, and the metadata for the data-point output will have the used `trace_id`. For details about propagation, refer to [About trace contexts](/javascript-api/k6-experimental/tracing#about-trace-contexts).

> The `instrumentHTTP` function takes a single configuration object argument that can be used to configure the tracer. The argument should be an instance of the [`Options`](/javascript-api/k6-experimental/tracing/options) object.

Reviewer 3: `instance of` makes it sound like `Options` is some kind of type while it is just a description of fields that are recognised by `instrumentHTTP` and `Client`

I see that for `k6/http` we mostly [just link](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-http/request/) to it and do not (at least) use the wording "instance of". 

Can we maybe move to the same format - were we have "Parameter" and "returns" tables?

Author: I actually forgot to make a table here 🙇 Switching to the same format as http indeed 👍

## Example

This example demonstrates how calling the `instrumentHTTP` function in the init context of a script once ensures that all requests made by the HTTP module from that point forward will have a trace context header attached.

<CodeGroup labels={["example-tracing-instrumentHTTP.js"]} lineNumbers={[]} showCopyButton={[true]}>

```javascript
import { check } from "k6";
import tracing from "k6/experimental/tracing";
import http from "k6/http";

// instrumentHTTP will ensure that all requests made by the http module
// will be traced. The first argument is a configuration object that
// can be used to configure the tracer.
//
// Currently supported HTTP methods are: get, post, put, patch, head,
// del, options, and request.
tracing.instrumentHTTP({
  // propagator defines the trace context propagation format.
  // Currently supported: w3c and jaeger.
  // Default: w3c
  propagator: "w3c",
});

export default () => {
  const res = http.get("http://httpbin.org/get", {
    headers: {
      "X-Example-Header": "instrumented/get",
    },
  });
  check(res, {
    "status is 200": (r) => r.status === 200,

>   });

Reviewer 3: Same comment - I think we are over adding `check`s everywhere and if we are going to be doing that, let's check for something relevant for the example :shrug:

---
title: 'instrumentHTTP'
excerpt: 'instrumentHTTP instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities.'
---

The `instrumentHTTP` function instruments the k6 http module with tracing capabilities. It transparently replaces each of the k6 http module functions with versions that automatically attach a trace context to every request. Functions that you can instrument include [del](/javascript-api/k6-http/del), [get](/javascript-api/k6-http/get), [head](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), [options](/javascript-api/k6-http/options), [patch](/javascript-api/k6-http/patch), [post](/javascript-api/k6-http/post), [put](/javascript-api/k6-http/head), and [request](/javascript-api/k6-http/request).

> A trace context in a set of standardized HTTP headers added to a request that allows a tracing system to correlate the request with other requests as they navigate through a system. The trace context specifications such as the supported [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) and [Jaeger Trace Context](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.21/client-libraries/#propagation-format) define specific header names, and an encoding format for the header values. A trace context generally consists in, at least, a `trace_id`, a `span_id`, and a `sampled` flag. The `trace_id` is a unique identifier for the trace, the `span_id` is a unique identifier for the request, and the `sampled` flag is a boolean that indicates whether the request should be traced or not. For instance, the [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) defines the `Traceparent` header, whose value contains a `trace_id`, a `span_id` and a `sampled` flag, encoded as a dash (`-`) separated list of hexadecimal values. When a trace context header is attached to an HTTP request, we refer to it as being "propagated" to the downstream service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _trace context_ is a set of standardized HTTP headers added to a request that lets a tracing system correlate the request with other requests as they navigate through a system. The trace context specifications, such as the supported [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) and [Jaeger Trace Context](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.21/client-libraries/#propagation-format), define specific header names and an encoding format for the header values. A trace context generally consists of, at least, a `trace_id`, a `span_id`, and a `sampled` flag. The `trace_id` is a unique identifier for the trace, the `span_id` is a unique identifier for the request, and the `sampled` flag is a boolean that indicates whether the request should be traced or not. For instance, the [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) defines the `Traceparent` header, whose value contains a `trace_id`, a `span_id` and a `sampled` flag, encoded as a dash (`-`) separated list of hexadecimal values. When a trace context header is attached to an HTTP request, we refer to it as being "propagated" to the downstream service.
```
